good evening from hofstra university in
hempstead new york i'm lester holt
anchor of nbc nightly news i want to
welcome you to the first presidential
debate the participants tonight are
donald trump and hillary clinton this
debate is sponsored by the commission on
presidential debates a nonpartisan
nonprofit organization the commission
drafted tonight's format and the rules
have been agreed to by the campaigns
the 90-minute debate is divided into six
segments each 15 minutes long we'll
explore three topic areas tonight
achieving prosperity america's direction
and securing america at the start of
each segment i will ask the same lead-off
question to both candidates and they
will each have up to two minutes to
respond from that point until the end of
the segment we'll have an open
discussion the questions are mine and
have not been shared with the commission
or the campaigns the audience here in
the room has agreed to remain silent so
that we can focus on what the candidates
are saying i will invite you to applaud
however at this moment as we welcome the
candidates democratic nominee for
president of the united states hillary
clinton and republican nominee for
president of the united states
donald j trump how are you donald good luck to you well i don't expect us to cover all the
issues of this campaign tonight but i
remind everyone there are two more
presidential debates scheduled we are
going to focus on many of the issues
that voters tell us are most important
and we're going to press for specifics i
am honored to have this role but this
evening belongs to the candidates and
just as important to the american people
candidates we look forward to hearing
you articulate your policies and your
positions as well as your visions and
your values so let's begin we're calling
this opening segment achieving
prosperity and central to that is jobs
there are two economic realities in
america today there's been a record six
straight years of job growth and new
census numbers show incomes have
increased at a record rate after years
of stagnation
however income inequality remains
significant and nearly half of americans
are living paycheck to paycheck
beginning with you secretary clinton why
are you a better choice than your
opponent to create the kinds of jobs
that will put more money into the
pockets of american workers well thank
you lester and thanks to hofstra for
hosting us the central question in this
election is really what kind of country
we want to be and what kind of future
we'll build together today is my
granddaughter's second birthday so i
think about this a lot first we have to
build an economy that works for everyone
not just those at the top that means we
need new jobs good jobs with rising
incomes i want us to invest in you i
want us to invest in your future that
means jobs in infrastructure in
advanced manufacturing innovation and
technology clean renewable energy and
small business because most of the new
jobs will come from small business we
also have to make the economy fairer
that starts with raising the national
minimum wage and also guarantee finally
equal pay for women's work i also want
to see more companies do profit-sharing
if you help create the profits you
should be able to share in them not just
the executives at the top and i want us
to do more to support people who are
struggling to balance family and work
i've heard from so many of you about the
difficult choices you face and the
stresses that you're under so let's have
paid family leave earned sick days let's
be sure we have affordable child care and
debt-free college how are we going to do
it we're going to do it by having the
wealthy pay their fair share and close
the corporate loopholes finally we
tonight are on the stage together donald
trump and i donald it's good to be with
you we're going to have a debate where
we are talking about the important
issues facing our country you have to
judge us who can shoulder the immense
awesome responsibilities of the
presidency who can put into action the
plans that will make your life better i
hope that i will be able to earn your
vote on november 8th secretary clinton
thank you mr trump the same question to
you it's about putting money-more money
into the pockets of american workers you
have up to two minutes thank you lester
our jobs are fleeing the country they're
going to mexico they're going to many
other countries you look at what china
is doing to our country in terms of
making our product they're devaluing
their currency and there's nobody in our
government to fight them and we have a
very good fight and we have a winning
fight because they're using our country
as a piggy bank to rebuild china and
many other countries are doing the same
thing so we're losing our good jobs so
many of them when you look at what's
happening in mexico a friend of mine who
builds plants said it's the eighth wonder of
the world they're building some of the
biggest plants anywhere in the world
some of the most sophisticated some of
the best plants with the united states
as he said not so much so ford is
leaving you see that their small car
division leaving thousands of jobs
leaving michigan leaving ohio they're
all leaving and we can't allow it to
happen anymore as far as child care is
concerned and so many other things i
think hillary and i agree on that we
probably disagree a little bit as to
numbers and amounts and what we're going
to do but perhaps we'll be talking about
that later
but we have to stop our jobs from being
stolen from us we have to stop our
companies from leaving the united states
and with it firing all of their people
all you have to do is take a look at
carrier air conditioning in indianapolis
they left-fired 1,400 people they're
going to mexico so many hundreds and
hundreds of companies are doing this we
cannot let it happen under my plan i'll
be reducing taxes tremendously from 35
percent to 15 percent for companies small and big
businesses that's going to be a job
creator like we haven't seen since
ronald reagan it's going to be a
beautiful thing to watch companies will
come they will build they will expand
new companies will start and i look very
very much forward to doing it we have to
renegotiate our trade deals and we have
to stop these countries from stealing
our companies and our jobs secretary
clinton would you like to respond well i
think that trade is an important issue
of course we are 5 percent of the world's
population we have to trade with the
other 95 percent and we need to have smart fair
trade deals we also though need to have
a tax system that rewards work and not
just financial transactions and the kind
of plan that donald has put forth would
be trickle-down economics all over again
in fact it would be the most extreme
version the biggest tax cuts for the top
percent of the people in this country
than we've ever had i call it trumped-up
trickle-down because that's exactly what
it would be that is not how we grow the
economy we just have a different view
about what's best for growing the
economy how we make investments that
will actually produce jobs and rising
incomes i think we come at it from
somewhat different perspectives i
understand that you know donald was very
fortunate in his life and that's all to
his benefit he started his business with
14 million borrowed from his
father and he really believes that the
more you help wealthy people the better
off we'll be and that everything will
work out from there
i don't buy that i have a different
experience my father was a small-businessman
he worked really hard he
printed drapery fabrics on long tables
where he pulled out those fabrics and he
went down with a silkscreen and dumped
the paint in and took the squeegee and
kept going and so what i believe is the
more we can do for the middle class the
more we can invest in you your education
your skills your future the better we
will be off and the better we'll grow
that's the kind of economy i want us to
see again let me follow up with mr trump
if i can you've talked about creating 25
million jobs and you've promised to
bring back millions of jobs for
americans how are you going to bring back
the industries that have left this
country for cheaper labor overseas how
specifically are you going to tell american
manufacturers that you have to come back
well for one thing-and before we start
on that-my father gave me a very small
loan in 1975 and i built it into a
company that's worth many many billions
of dollars with some of the greatest
assets in the world and i say that only
because that's the kind of thinking that
our country needs our country's in deep
trouble we don't know what we're doing
when it comes to devaluations and all of
these countries all over the world
especially china they're the best
the best ever at it what they're doing
to us is a very very sad thing so we
have to do that we have to renegotiate
our trade deals and lester they're taking
our jobs they're giving incentives
they're doing things that frankly we
don't do let me give you the example of
mexico they have a vat tax we're on a
different system when we sell into
mexico there's a tax when they sell in-automatic
16 percent approximately when
they sell into us there's no tax it's a
defective agreement it's been defective
for a long time many years but the
politicians haven't done anything
about it now in all fairness to
secretary clinton-yes is that ok good i
want you to be very happy it's very
important to me but in all fairness to
secretary clinton when she started
talking about this it was really very
recently she's been doing this for 30
years and why hasn't she made the
agreements better the nafta agreement is
defective just because of the tax and
many other reasons but just because of
the fact let me interrupt just a moment but
secretary clinton and others
politicians should have been doing this
for years not right now because of the
fact that we've created a movement they
should have been doing this for years
what's happened to our jobs and our
country and our economy generally is-look
we owe 20 trillion we
cannot do it any longer lester back to the
question though how do you bring back-specifically
bring back jobs american
manufacturers how do you make them bring
the jobs back well the first thing you
do is don't let the jobs leave the
companies are leaving i could name i
mean there are thousands of them they're
leaving and they're leaving in bigger
numbers than ever and what you do is you
say fine you want to go to mexico or
some other country good luck we wish you
a lot of luck but if you think you're
going to make your air conditioners or your
cars or your cookies or whatever you
make and bring them into our country
without a tax you're wrong and once you
say you're going to have to tax them coming
in and our politicians never do this
because they have special interests and
the special interests want those
companies to leave because in many cases
they own the companies so what i'm
saying is we can stop them from leaving
we have to stop them from leaving and
that's a big big factor
let me let secretary clinton get in here well let's
stop for a second and remember where we
were eight years ago we had the worst
financial crisis the great recession the
worst since the 1930s that was in large
part because of tax policies that slashed
taxes on the wealthy failed to invest in
the middle class took their eyes off of
wall street and created a perfect storm
in fact donald was one of the people who
rooted for the housing crisis he said
back in 2006 gee i hope it does collapse
because then i can go in and buy some
and make some money well it did collapse
that's called business by the way nine million
people-nine million people lost their
jobs five million people lost their
homes and 13 trillion in
family wealth was wiped out now we have
come back from that abyss and it has not
been easy so we're now on the
precipice of having a potentially much
better economy but the last thing we
need to do is to go back to the policies
that failed us in the first place
independent experts have looked at what
i've proposed and looked at what
donald's proposed and basically they've
said this that if his tax plan which
would blow up the debt by over 5
trillion and would in some
instances disadvantage middle-class
families compared to the wealthy were to
go into effect we would lose 3.5
million jobs and maybe have another
recession they've looked at my plans and
they've said ok if we can do this and
i intend to get it done we will have 10
million more new jobs because we will
be making investments where we can grow
the economy take clean energy some
country is going to be the clean energy
superpower of the 21st century
donald thinks that climate change is a
hoax perpetrated by the chinese i think
it's real i did not i did not i do not say that i think science is real i do not say that and i
think it's important that we grip this and deal with it
both at home and abroad and here's what
we can do we can deploy a half a billion
more solar panels we can have enough
clean energy to power every home we can
build a new modern electric grid that's
a lot of jobs that's a lot of new
economic activity so i've tried to be
very specific about what we can and
should do and i am determined that we're
going to get the economy really moving
again building on the progress we've
made over the last eight years but never
going back to what got us in trouble in
the first place mr trump she talks
about solar panels we invested in a
solar company our country that was a
disaster they lost plenty of money on that one
now look i'm a great believer in all
forms of energy but we're putting a lot
of people out of work our energy
policies are a disaster our country is
losing so much in terms of energy in
terms of paying off our debt you can't
do what you're looking to do with 20
trillion in debt the obama
administration from the time they've
come in is over 230 years
worth of debt and he's topped it he's
doubled it in a course of almost eight
years seven-and-a-half years to be semi
exact so i will tell you this we have to
do a much better job at keeping our jobs
and we have to do a much better job at
giving companies incentives to build new
companies or to expand because they're
not doing it and all you have to do is
look at michigan and look at ohio and
look at all of these places where so
many of their jobs and their
companies are just leaving they're gone and
hillary i'd just ask you this you've been
doing this for 30 years why are you just
thinking about these solutions right now
for 30 years you've been doing it and
now you're just starting to think of
solutions well actually i will bring-excuse me i
will bring back jobs you can't bring
back jobs well actually i have thought about
this quite a bit yeah for 30 years and i have-well
not quite that long i think my
husband did a pretty good job in the
1990s i think a lot about what worked
and how we can make it work again well
he approved nafta million new jobs a balanced budget he approved nafta which is the
single worst trade deal ever approved in this country incomes went up for
everybody manufacturing jobs went up also in the
1990s if we're actually going to look at
the facts when i was in the senate i had
a number of trade deals that came before
me and i held them all to the same test
will they create jobs in america will
they raise incomes in america and are
they good for our national security
some of them i voted for the biggest one
a multinational one known as cafta i
voted against and because i hold the
same standards as i look at all of these
trade deals but let's not assume that
trade is the only challenge we have in
the economy i think it is a part of it
and i've said what i'm going to do i'm
going to have a special prosecutor we're
going to enforce the trade deals we have
and we're going to hold people
accountable when i was secretary of
state we actually increased american
exports globally 30 percent we increased
them to china 50 percent so i know how
to really work
to get new jobs and to get exports that
helped to create more new jobs very quickly but
you haven't done it in 30 years or 26
years or any number you want to well i've been a senator donald you haven't done
it you haven't done it and i have been a secretary of state excuse me and i have done a lot your husband signed nafta which was one of the worst
things that ever happened to the manufacturing
industry well that's your opinion that is your opinion you go to new england you go to
ohio pennsylvania you go anywhere you
want secretary clinton and you will see
devastation where manufacture is down 30
40 sometimes 50 percent nafta is the worst
trade deal maybe ever signed anywhere
but certainly ever signed in this
country and now you want to approve
trans-pacific partnership you were
totally in favor of it then you heard
what i was saying how bad it is and you
said i can't win that debate but you
know that if you did win you would approve
that and that will be almost as
bad as nafta nothing will ever top nafta
well that is just not accurate i was
against it once it was finally
negotiated and the terms were laid out i
wrote about that in you called it the
gold standard
you called it the gold standard
of trade deals you said it's the finest
deal you've ever seen no and then you
heard what i said about it and all of a
sudden you were against it well donald i
know you live in your own reality but
that is not the facts the facts are-i
did say i hoped it would be a good deal
but when it was negotiated not which i was
not responsible for i concluded it
wasn't i wrote about that in my book so is it
president obama's fault before you even announced is it
president obama's fault look
there are differences secretary is it president obama's fault there are
because he's pushing it there are different
views about what's good for our country
our economy and our leadership in the
world and i think it's important to look
at what we need to do to get the economy
going again that's why i said new jobs
with rising incomes investments not in
more tax cuts that would add 5
trillion to the debt but you
have no plan but in-oh but i do secretary you
have no plan in fact i have written a book about it it's called
stronger together you can pick it up
tomorrow at a bookstore that's about all you've folks we're going to or at
an airport near you we're going to move to
but it's because i see this-we need to
have strong growth
fair growth sustained growth we also
have to look at how we help families
balance the responsibilities at home and
the responsibilities at business so we
have a very robust set of plans and
people have looked at both of our plans
have concluded that mine would create 10
million jobs and yours would lose us
3.5 million jobs and
explode the debt which would have a recession you are going to approve one of the biggest tax cuts in history you are going
to approve one of the biggest tax
increases in history you are going to
drive business out your regulations are
a disaster and you're going to increase
regulations all over the place and by
the way my tax cut is the biggest since
ronald reagan i'm very proud of it it
will create tremendous numbers of new
jobs but regulations you are going to
regulate these businesses out of
existence when i go around-lester i tell
you this i've been all over and when i
go around
despite the tax cut the thing-the things
that business as in people like the most
is the fact that i'm cutting regulation
you have regulations on top of
regulations and new companies cannot
form and old companies are going out of
business and you want to increase the
regulations and make them even worse i'm
going to cut regulations i'm going
to cut taxes big league and you're going to
raise taxes big league end of story
let me get you to pause right there
because we're going to move into-we're going to move into the next segment we're going to talk taxes that can't-that can't be left to stand please just take 30 seconds and then we're going to go on i kind of assumed that there would be a lot of
these charges and claims and so facts so we
have taken the home page of my
website hillaryclinton.com and we've
turned it into a fact-checker so if you
want to see in real-time what the facts
are please go and take a look because
what i have proposed and take a look at mine also and you'll see would not add a
penny to the debt and your plans would
add 5 trillion to the debt
what i have proposed would cut
regulations and streamline them for
small businesses what i have proposed
would be paid for by raising taxes on
the wealthy because they have made all
the gains in the economy and i think
it's time that the wealthy and
corporations paid their fair share to
support this country well you just opened the next
segment well could i just finish-i think i i'm going to give you a chance right here i think i should-you go to her website and you take a look at her website with a new 15-minute segment she's going to raise taxes 1.3
trillion mr trump i'm going to and look at her
website you know what it's no difference
than this she's telling us how to fight
isis just go to her website she tells
you how to fight isis on her website
i don't think general douglas macarthur
would like that too much the
next segment we're continuing well at least i have a plan to fight isis achieving prosperity no no
you're telling the enemy everything you
want to do no we're not no we're not see you're telling the enemy
everything you want to do no wonder
you've been fighting-no wonder you've
been fighting isis your entire adult
life that's a-that's-go to the-please fact checkers
get to work ok you are unpacking a lot here
and we're still on the issue of
achieving prosperity and i want to talk
about taxes the fundamental difference
between the two of you concerns the
wealthy secretary clinton you're calling
for a tax increase on the wealthiest
americans i'd like you to further
defend that and mr trump you're calling
for tax cuts for the wealthy i'd like
you to defend that and this next
two-minute answer goes to you mr trump
well i'm really calling for major jobs
because the wealthy are going to create
tremendous jobs they're going to expand
their companies they're going to do a
tremendous job i'm getting rid of the
carried interest provision and if you
really look it's not a tax-it's really
not a great thing for the wealthy it's a
great thing for the middle class it's a
great thing for companies to expand and
when these people are going to put
billions and billions of dollars into
companies and when they're going to
bring 2.5 trillion
back from overseas where they can't
bring the money back because politicians
like secretary clinton won't allow them
to bring the money back because the
taxes are so onerous and the
bureaucratic red tape so what-is so bad
so what they're doing is they're leaving
our country and they're believe it or not
leaving because taxes are too high and
because some of them have lots of money
outside of our country and instead of
bringing it back and putting the money
to work because they can't work out a
deal to-and everybody agrees it should
be brought back instead of that they're
leaving our country to get their money
because they can't bring their
money back into our country because of
bureaucratic red tape because they can't
get together because we have-we have a
president that can't sit them
around a table and get them to approve
something and here's the thing
republicans and democrats agree that
this should be done 2.5
trillion i happen to think it's double
that it's probably 5 trillion
that we can't bring into our country
lester and with a little leadership
you'd get it in here very quickly and it
could be put to use on the inner cities
and lots of other things and it would be
beautiful but we have no leadership and
honestly that starts with secretary
clinton all right you have two minutes
of the same question to defend tax
increases on the wealthiest americans
secretary clinton i have a feeling that by the end of this evening i'm going to be blamed for
everything that's ever
happened why not why not yeah why not you know just
join the debate by saying
more crazy things now let me say this it is absolutely the case there's
nothing crazy about not letting our companies bring their money back
into their country this is-this is secretary clinton's
two minutes please
yes yeah well let's start the clock again
lester we've looked at your tax
proposals i don't see changes in the
corporate tax rates or the kinds of
proposals you're referring to that would
cause the repatriation bringing back of
money that's stranded overseas i happen
to support that then you didn't read it i happen to-i happen to
support that in a way that will actually
work to our benefit but when i look at
what you have proposed you have what is
called now the trump loophole because it
would so advantage you and the business
you do you've proposed an approach that has a who gave it that name the first i've-who gave it that name mr trump this is secretary clinton's two minutes 4 billion tax benefit for your
family and when you look at what you are proposing how much how much for my family it
is lester how much as i said trumped-up trickle-down
trickle-down did not work it got us into
the mess we were in in 2008
and 2009 slashing taxes on the
wealthy hasn't worked and a lot of
really smart wealthy people know that
and they are saying hey we need to do
more to make the contributions we should
be making to rebuild the middle class
i don't think top-down works in america
i think building the middle class
investing in the middle class making
college debt-free so more young people
can get their education helping people
refinance their-their debt
from college at a lower rate those are
the kinds of things that will really
boost the economy broad-based inclusive
growth is what we need in america not
more advantages for people at the very
top mr trump we're typical politician all talk no
action sounds good doesn't work never
going to happen
our country is suffering because people
like secretary clinton have made such
bad decisions in terms of our jobs and
in terms of what's going on now look we
have the worst revival of an economy
since the great depression and believe
me we're in a bubble right now and the
only thing that looks good is the stock
market but if you raise interest rates
even a little bit that's going to come
crashing down we are in a big fat ugly
bubble and we better be awfully careful
and we have a fed that's doing political
things this janet yellen of the fed the
fed is doing political-by keeping the
interest rates at this level and believe
me the day obama goes off and he leaves
and goes out to the golf course for
the rest of his life to play golf when
they raise interest rates you're going to
see some very bad things happen because
the fed is not doing their job the fed
is being more political than secretary
clinton mr trump we're talking about
the burden that americans have to pay
yet you have not released your tax
returns and the reason nominees have
released their returns for decades is
so that voters will know if their potential
president owes money to-who he
owes it to and any business conflicts
don't americans have a right to know if
there are any conflicts of interest i
don't mind releasing-i'm under a routine
audit and it'll be released and-as soon
as the audit's finished it will be
released but you will learn more about
donald trump by going down to
the federal elections where i filed a
104-page essentially financial statement
of sorts the forms that they have it
shows income-in fact the income-i just
looked today-the income is filed at 694
million
for this past year 694
million if you would have told me i
was going to make that 15 or 20
years ago i would have been very
surprised but that's the kind of
thinking that our country needs when we
have a country that's doing so badly
that's being ripped off by every single
country in the world it's the kind of
thinking that our country needs because
everybody-lester we have a trade deficit
with all of the countries that we do
business with of almost 800
billion a year you know what that is
that means who's negotiating these trade
deals we have people that are political
hacks negotiating our trade deals the irs
says an audit excuse me of your taxes-you're
perfectly free to release your taxes
during an audit and so the question does
the public's right to know outweigh
your personal well i told you i will
release them as soon as the audit look
i've been under audit almost for 15
years i know a lot of wealthy people
that have never been audited i said
do you get audited i get audited
almost every year and in a way i should
be complaining i'm not even complaining
i don't mind it it's almost become a way
of life i get audited by the irs but
other people don't i will say this we
have a situation in this country that
has to be taken care of i will release
my tax returns-against my lawyer's wishes-when
she releases her 33,000 e-mails that
have been deleted as soon as she
releases them i will release i will
release my tax returns and that's
against-my lawyers they say don't do it
i will tell you this
no-in fact watching shows they're reading the
papers almost every lawyer says you don't
release your returns until the audit's
complete when the audit's complete i'll
do it but i would go against them if she
releases her e-mails so it's negotiable it's not
negotiable no let her release the e-mails
why did she delete 33,000 well i'll let her
answer that but let me just admonish the audience
one more time there was an agreement we
did ask you to be silent so it would be
helpful for us
secretary clinton well i think you've
just seen another example of bait-and
switch here for 40 years everyone
running for president has released their
tax returns you can go and see nearly i
think 39 40 years of our tax returns but
everyone has done it
we know the irs has made clear there is
no prohibition on releasing it when
you're under audit so you've got to ask
yourself why won't he release his tax
returns and i think there may be a
couple of reasons first maybe he's not
as rich as he says he is second maybe
he's not as charitable as he claims to
be third we don't know all of his business
dealings but we have been told through
investigative reporting that he owes
about 650 million
to wall street and foreign banks
or maybe he doesn't want the american
people all of you watching tonight to
know that he's paid nothing in federal
taxes because the only years that
anybody's ever seen were a couple of
years when he had to turn them over to
state authorities when he was trying to
get a casino license and they showed he
didn't pay any federal income tax
that makes me smart so if he's paid zero that means zero for
troops zero for vets zero for schools or
health and i think probably he's not all
that enthusiastic about having the rest
of our country see what the real reasons
are because it must be something really
important even terrible that he's trying
to hide and the financial disclosure
statements they don't give you the tax
rate they don't give you all the details
that tax returns would and it just seems
to me that this is something that the
american people deserve to see and i
have no reason to believe that he's ever
going to release his tax returns because
there's something he's hiding and we'll
guess we'll keep guessing at what it
might be that he's hiding but i think
the question is were he ever to get
near the white house
what would be those conflicts who does
he owe money to well he owes you the
answers to that and he should provide
them he also-he also raised the issue of
your e-mails do you want to respond to
that i do you know i made a mistake
using a private e mail that's for sure
and if i had to do it over again i would
obviously do it differently but i'm not
going to make any excuses it was a mistake
and i take responsibility for that mr
trump that was more than a mistake that
was done purposely ok that was not a
mistake that was done purposely when you
have your staff taking the fifth
amendment taking the fifth so they're
not prosecuted when you have the man
that set up the illegal server taking
the fifth i think it's disgraceful and
believe me this country thinks it's-really
thinks it's disgraceful
also as far as my tax returns you don't
learn that much from tax returns that i
can tell you you learn a lot from
financial disclosure and you should go
down and take a look at that the other
thing i'm extremely underleveraged
the report that said 650-which by the
way a lot of friends of mine that know
my business say boy that's really not a
lot of money it's not a lot of money
relative to what i had the buildings that
were in question they said in the same
report which was-actually it wasn't even
a bad story to be honest with you but
the buildings are worth 3.9
billion and the 650 isn't even
on that but it's not 650 it's much less
than that
but i could give you a list of banks i
would-if that would help you i would
give you a list of banks these are very
fine institutions very fine banks i
could do that very quickly
i am very underleveraged i have a great
company i have a tremendous income and
the reason i say that is not in a
braggadocios way it's because it's
about time that this country had
somebody running it that has an idea
about money when we have 20 trillion
in debt and our country's a mess
you know it's one thing to have 20
trillion in debt and our roads are good
and our bridges are good and
everything's in great shape our airports
our airports are like from a third world country
you land at laguardia you land at
kennedy you land at lax
you land at newark and you come in from
dubai and qatar and you see these incredible-you
come in from china you
see these incredible airports and you
land-we've become a third world country
so the worst of all things has happened
we owe 20 trillion and we're a
mess we haven't even started and we've
spent 6 trillion in the middle
east according to a report that i just
saw whether it's 6 or 5 but it
looks like it's 6 6 trillion
in the middle east we could have rebuilt
our country twice and it's really a
shame and it's politicians like
secretary clinton that have caused this
problem our country has tremendous
problems we're a debtor nation we're a
serious debtor nation and we have a
country that needs new roads new tunnels
new bridges new airports new schools new
hospitals and we don't have the money
because it's been squandered on so many
of your ideas we'll let you respond and we'll move on to the next segment and maybe because you haven't paid any
federal income tax for a lot of years
and the other thing i think is important
it would be squandered too believe me is if
your-if your main claim to be president of
the united states is your business then
i think we should talk about that you
know your campaign manager said that you
built a lot of businesses on the backs
of little guys and indeed i have met a
lot of the people who were stiffed by
you and your businesses donald i've met
dishwashers painters architects glass
installers marble installers drapery
installers like my dad was who you
refused to pay when they finished the
work that you asked them to do we have
an architect in the audience who
designed one of your clubhouses at one
of your golf courses it's a beautiful
facility it immediately was put to use
and you wouldn't pay what the man needed
to be paid what he was charging you to do maybe he
didn't do a good job and i was
unsatisfied with his work well to which our
country should do
too do the thousands of people that you have stiffed over the
course of your business not deserve some
kind of apology from someone who has
taken their labor taken the goods that
they produced and then refused to pay
them i can only say that i'm certainly
relieved that my late father never did
business with you he provided a good
middle-class life for us but the people
he worked for he expected the bargain to
be kept on both sides and when we talk
about your business
you've taken business bankruptcy six
times there are a lot of great businesspeople
that have never taken bankruptcy
once you call yourself the king of debt
you talk about leverage you even at one
time suggested that you would try to
negotiate down the national debt of
the united states wrong wrong well sometimes there's
not a direct transfer of skills from
business to government but sometimes
what happened in business would be
really bad for government let's let mr trump and we need to be very clear about that so yeah i
think-i do think it's time look it's all
words it's all sound bites i built an
unbelievable company some of the
greatest assets anywhere in the world
real estate assets anywhere in the world
beyond the united states in europe lots
of different places
it's an unbelievable company but on
occasion four times we used certain laws
that are there and when secretary
clinton talks about people that didn't
get paid first of all they did get paid
a lot but taken advantage of the laws
of the nation now if you want to change
the laws you've been there a long time
change the laws but i take advantage of
the laws of the nation because i'm
running a company my obligation right
now is to do well for myself my family
my employees for my companies and that's
what i do but what she doesn't say is
that tens of thousands of people that are
unbelievably happy and that love me i'll
give you an example we're just opening
up on pennsylvania avenue right next to
the white house so if i don't get there
one way i'm going to get to pennsylvania
avenue another but we're opening the old
post office under budget ahead of
schedule saved tremendous money i'm a
year ahead of schedule
and that's what this country should be
doing we build roads and they cost two
and three and four times what they're
supposed to cost we buy products for our
military and they come in at costs that
are so far above what they were supposed
to be because we don't have people that
know what they're doing when we look at
the budget the budget is bad to a large
extent because we have people that have
no idea as to what to do and how to buy
the trump international is way under
budget and way ahead of schedule and we
should be able to do that for our country well we're well
behind schedule so i want to move to our
next segment we move into our next
segment talking about america's
direction and let's start by talking
about race the share of americans who
say race relations are bad in this
country is the highest it's been in
decades much of it amplified by shootings of
african-americans by police as we've
seen recently in charlotte and tulsa
race has been a big issue in this
campaign and one of you is going to have
to bridge a very wide and bitter gap so
how do you heal the divide secretary
clinton you get two minutes on this well
you're right race remains a significant
challenge in our country unfortunately
race still determines too much often
determines where people live determines
what kind of education in their public
schools they can get and yes it
determines how they're treated in the
criminal justice system we've just seen
those two tragic examples in both tulsa
and charlotte and we've got to do
several things at the same time we have
to restore trust between communities and
the police we have to work to make sure
that our police are using the best
training the best techniques that
they're well prepared to use force only
when necessary
everyone should be respected by the law
and everyone should respect the law
right now that's not the case in a lot
of our neighborhoods so i have ever
since the first day of my campaign
called for criminal justice reform i've
laid out a platform that i think would
begin to remedy some of the problems we
have in the criminal justice system but
we also have to recognize in addition to
the challenges that we face with
policing there are so many good brave
police officers who equally want reform
so we have to bring communities together
in order to begin working on that as a
mutual goal and we've got to get guns
out of the hands of people who should
not have them the gun epidemic is the
leading cause of death of young
african american men more than the next
nine causes put together so we have to
do two things as i said we have to
restore trust we have to work with the
police we have to make sure they respect
the communities and the communities
respect them and we have to tackle the
plague of gun violence which is a big
contributor to a lot of the problems
that we're seeing today all right mr trump you
have two minutes how do you heal the
divide well first of all secretary
clinton doesn't want to use a couple of
words and that's law and order and we
need law and order if we don't have it
we're not going to have a country and
when i look at what's going on in
charlotte a city i love a city where i
have investments when i look at what's
going on throughout various parts of our
country whether it's-i mean i can just
keep naming them all day long-we need
law and order in our country i just
got today the as you know the
endorsement of the fraternal order of
police we just-just came in we have
endorsements from i think almost every
police group very-i mean a large
percentage of them in the united states
we have a situation where we have our
inner cities african americans hispanics
are living in hell because it's so
dangerous you walk down the street
you get shot in chicago they've had
thousands of shootings thousands since
january 1st
thousands of shootings and i'm saying
where is this is this a war-torn country
what are we doing and we have to stop
the violence we have to bring back law
and order in a place like chicago where
thousands of people have been killed
thousands over the last number of years
in fact almost 4,000 have been killed
since barack obama became president over-almost
4,000 people in chicago have been
killed we have to bring back law and
order now whether or not in a place like
chicago you do stop and frisk which
worked very well mayor giuliani is here
worked very well in new york it brought
the crime rate way down but you take the
gun away from criminals that shouldn't
be having it we have gangs roaming the
street and in many cases they're
illegally here illegal immigrants and
they have guns and they shoot people
and we have to be very strong and we
have to be very vigilant we have to be-we
have to know what we're doing right
now our police in many cases are afraid
to do anything we have to protect our
inner cities because african-american
communities are being decimated by crime
decimated your two-your two minutes expired but i do want
to follow up stop-and-frisk was ruled
unconstitutional in new york because it
largely singled out black and hispanic
young men no you're wrong it went before a
judge who was a very against-police
judge it was taken away from her and our
mayor our new mayor refused to go
forward with the case they would have
won an appeal if you look at it
throughout the country there are many
places where it's allowed the argument is that it's a form
of racial profiling no the argument is
that we have to take the guns away from
these people that have them and that
are bad people that shouldn't have them
these are felons these are people that
are bad people that shouldn't be-when
you have 3,000 shootings in chicago from
january 1st when you have 4,000 people
killed in chicago by guns from the
beginning of the presidency of
barack obama his hometown you have to
have stop-and-frisk you need more police
you need a better community you know
relation you don't have good community
relations in chicago it's terrible i
have property there it's terrible what's
going on in chicago but when you look-and
chicago's not the only-you go to
ferguson you go to so many different
places you need better relationships i
agree with secretary clinton on this you
need better relationships between the
communities and the police because in
some cases it's not good but you look at
dallas where the relationships were
really studied the relationships were
really a beautiful thing
and then five police officers were
killed one night very violently so
there's some bad things going on some
really bad things secretary clinton but we need-lester
we need law and order and we need
law and order in the inner cities
because the people that are most
affected by what's happening are
african-american and hispanic people and
it's very unfair to them what our
politicians are allowing to happen
secretary clinton well i've heard-i've heard
donald say this at his rallies and
it's really unfortunate that he
paints such a dire negative picture of
black communities in our country ugh you
know the vibrancy of the black church
the black businesses that employ so many
people the opportunities that so many
families are working to provide for
their kids there's a lot that we should
be proud of and we should be supporting
and lifting up but we do always have to
make sure we keep people safe there are
the right ways of doing it and then
there are ways that are ineffective
stop-and-frisk was found to be
unconstitutional and in part because it
was ineffective it did not do what it
needed to do now i believe in community
policing and in fact violent crime is
one-half of what it was in 1991 property
crime is down 40
percent we just don't want to see it creep back
up we've had 25 years of very good
cooperation but there were some problems
some unintended consequences too many
young african-american and latino men
ended up in jail for nonviolent offenses
and it's just a fact that if you're a
young african-american man and you do
the same thing as a young white man you
are more likely to be arrested charged
convicted and incarcerated so we've got
to address the systemic racism in our
criminal justice system we cannot just
say law and order we have to say-we
have to come forward with a plan that is
going to divert people from the criminal
justice system deal with mandatory
minimum sentences which have put too
many people away for too long for doing
too little we need to have more
second chance programs i'm glad that
we're ending private prisons in the
federal system i want to see them ended
in the state system you shouldn't have a
profit motivation to fill prison cells
with young americans so there are some
positive ways we can work on this and i
believe strongly that commonsense gun
safety measures would assist us right
now-and this is something donald has
supported along with the gun lobby-right
now we've got too many military-style
weapons on the streets in a lot of
places our police are outgunned we need
comprehensive background checks and we
need to keep guns out of the hands of
those who will do harm and we finally
need to pass a prohibition on anyone
who's on the terrorist watch list from
being able to buy a gun in our country
if you're too dangerous to fly you are
too dangerous to buy a gun so there are
things we can do and we ought to do it
in a bipartisan way secretary clinton last
week you said we've got to do everything
possible to improve policing to go right
at implicit bias do you believe that
police are implicitly biased against
black people lester i think implicit
bias is a problem for everyone not
just police i think unfortunately too
many of us in our great country jump
to conclusions about each other and
therefore i think we need all of us to
be asking hard questions about you know
why am i feeling this way but when it
comes to policing since it can have
literally fatal consequences i have said
in my first budget we would put money
into that budget to help us deal with
implicit bias by retraining a lot of our
police officers i've met with a group of
very distinguished experienced police
chiefs a few weeks ago they admit it's
an issue they've got a lot of concerns
mental health is one of the biggest
concerns because now police are having
to handle a lot of really difficult
mental health problems on the street
they want support they want more
training they want more assistance and i
think the federal government could be in
a position where we would offer and
provide that mr trump i'd like to respond to that please first
of all i agree and a lot of people even
within my own party want to give certain
rights to people on watch lists and
no-fly lists i agree with you when a
person is on a watch list or a no-fly
list and i have the endorsement of the
nra which i'm very proud of these are
very very good people and they're
protecting the second amendment but i
think we have to look very strongly at
no-fly lists and watch lists and when
people are on there even if they
shouldn't be on there we'll help them
we'll help them legally we'll help them
get off but i tend to agree with that
quite strongly i do want to bring up the
fact that you were the one that brought
up the words super-predator about young
black youth and that's a term that i
think was a-it's-it's been horribly
met as you know i think you've
apologized for it but i think it was a
terrible thing to say and when it comes
to stop-and-frisk you know you're
talking about taking guns away well i'm
talking about taking guns away from
gangs and people that use them and i
don't think-i really don't think you
disagree with me on this if you want to
know the truth i think maybe there's a
political reason why you can't say it
but i really don't believe-in new york
city stop-and-frisk we had 2,200
murders and stop-and-frisk brought
it down to 500 murders five hundred murders is
a lot of murders
it's hard to believe 500 is like supposed to
be good but we went from 2,200
to 500 and it was
continued on by mayor bloomberg and it
was terminated by current mayor but stop-and-frisk
had a tremendous impact on the
safety of new york city tremendous
beyond belief so when you say it has no
impact it really did it had a very very
big impact well it's also fair to say if
we're going to talk about mayors that
under the current mayor crime has
continued to drop including murders so
there is no you're wrong you're wrong no i'm not murders are up
all right you check it new york-new york has done
an excellent job and i give credit-i
give credit across the board
going back two mayors two police chiefs
because it has worked and other
communities need to come together to do
what will work as well look one murder
is too many but it is important that we
learn about what has been effective and
not go to things that sound good that
really did not have the kind of impact
that we would want who disagrees with
keeping neighborhoods safe but let's
also add no one should disagree about
respecting the rights of young men who
live in those neighborhoods and so we
need to do a better job of working again
with the communities faith communities
business communities as well as the
police to try to deal with this problem
this conversation is about race and so
mr trump i have to ask you for five i'd like to
just respond if i might please-20 seconds i'd just like
to respond please respond then i've got a quick follow-up for you
i will look the african-american
community has been let down by our
politicians they talk good around
election time like right now and after
the election they said see ya later
i'll see you in four years the
african-american community-because-look the
community within the inner cities has
been so badly treated they've been
abused and used in order to get votes by
democrat politicians because that's what
it is they've controlled these
communities for up to 100 years
mr trump let me well i-i do think and i will tell you
you look at the inner cities-and i just
left detroit and i just left
philadelphia and i just-you know you've
seen me i've been all over the place
you decided to stay home and that's ok
but i will tell you i've been all over
and i've met some of the greatest people
i'll ever meet within these communities
and they are very very upset with what
their politicians have told them and
what their politicians have done mr trump i
i think-i think-i think donald just
criticized me for preparing for this
debate and yes i did and you know what
else i prepared for i prepared to be
president and i think that's a good
thing mr trump for five years you
perpetuated a false claim that the
nation's first black president was not a
natural-born citizen you questioned his
legitimacy in the last couple of weeks
you acknowledged what most americans have
accepted for years the president was
born in the united states can you tell
us what took you so long i'll tell you very-well
just very simple to say sidney
blumenthal works for the campaign and
close-very close friend of secretary
clinton and her campaign manager
patti doyle went to-during the campaign
her campaign against president obama
fought very hard and you can go look it
up and you can check it out and if you
look at cnn this past week patti solis
doyle was on wolf blitzer saying that
this happened blumenthal sent
mcclatchy highly respected reporter at
mcclatchy to kenya to find out about it
they were pressing it very hard she
failed to get the birth certificate when
i got involved i didn't fail i got him
to give the birth certificate so i'm
satisfied with it and i'll tell you why
i'm satisfied with it that was because i
want to get on to defeating isis because
i want to get on to creating jobs
because i want to get on to having a
strong border because i want to get on
to things that are very important to me
and that are very important to the
country i will let you respond it's important
but i just want to get the answer here
the birth certificate was produced in
2011 you've continued to tell the story and
question the president's legitimacy in
2012 13 14 15
yeah as recently as january so the question
is what changed your mind well nobody was pressing
it nobody was caring much about it
i figured you'd ask the question tonight
of course but nobody was caring much
about it but i was the one that got him
to produce the birth certificate and i
think i did a good job
secretary clinton also fought it i mean
you know-now everybody in mainstream is
going to say oh that's not true look it's
true sidney blumenthal sent a reporter-you
just have to take a look at cnn the
last week the interview with your former
campaign manager and she was involved
but just like she can't bring back jobs
she can't produce i'm sorry i'm just
going to follow up-and i will let you respond
to that because there's a lot there
but we're talking about racial healing
in this segment what do you say to
americans people of color who well it was very-i say nothing i
say nothing because i was able to get
him to produce it he should have
produced it a long time before i say
nothing but let me just tell you when
you talk about healing i think that i've
developed very very good relationships
over the last little while with the
african-american community i think you
can see that and i feel that they really
wanted me to come to that conclusion and
i think i did a great job and a great
service not only for the country but
even for the president in getting him to
produce his birth certificate secretary clinton well just listen to
what you heard and clearly as donald
just admitted he knew he was going to
stand on this debate stage and lester
holt was going to be asking us questions
so he tried to put the whole racist
birther lie to bed but it can't be
dismissed that easily he has really
started his political activity based on
this racist lie that our first black
president was not an american citizen
there was absolutely no evidence for it
but he persisted he persisted year after
year because some of his supporters
people that he was trying to bring into
his fold apparently believed it or
wanted to believe it but remember donald
started his career back in 1973 being
sued by the justice department for
racial discrimination because he would
not rent apartments in one of his
developments to african-americans and he
made sure that the people who worked for
him understood that was the policy he
actually was sued twice by the justice
department so he has a long record of
engaging in racist behavior and the
birther lie was a very hurtful one you
know barack obama is a man of great
dignity and i could tell how much it
bothered him and annoyed him that this
was being touted and used against him
but i like to remember what michelle
obama said in her amazing speech at our
democratic national convention when they
go low we go high and barack obama went
high despite donald trump's best efforts
to bring him down
mr trump you can respond and we're going to move on to the next segment i would love to respond
first of all i got to watch in preparing
for this some of your debates against
barack obama you treated him with
terrible disrespect and i watched the
way you talk now about how lovely
everything is and how wonderful you are
it doesn't work that way
you were after him you were trying to-you
even sent out or your campaign sent
out pictures of him in a certain garb
very famous pictures i don't think you
can deny that but just last week your
campaign manager said it was true so
when you tried to act holier than thou it
really doesn't work it really doesn't
now as far as the lawsuit yes when i was
very young i went into my father's
company had a real estate company in
brooklyn and queens and we along with
many many
other companies throughout the country-it
was a federal lawsuit-were sued we
settled the suit with zero-with no
admission of guilt it was very easy to
do but they sued many people i notice
you bring that up a lot and you know i
also notice the very nasty commercials
that you do on me in so many different
ways which i don't do on you maybe i'm
trying to save the money but frankly i
look-i look at that and i say isn't that
amazing because i settled that lawsuit
with no admission of guilt but that was
a lawsuit brought against many real
estate firms and it's just one of those
things i'll go one step further in
palm beach florida tough community a
brilliant community a wealthy community
probably the wealthiest community there
is in the world i opened a club and
really got great credit for it no
discrimination against african-americans
against muslims against anybody and it's
a tremendously successful club and i'm
so glad i did it and i have been given
great credit for what i did and i'm very
very proud of it and that's the way i
feel that is the true way i feel our next
segment is called securing america we
want to start with a 21st century war
happening every day in this country our
institutions are under cyber attack and
our secrets are being stolen so my
question is who's behind it and how do
we fight it secretary clinton this
answer goes to you well i think cyber
security cyber warfare will be one of
the biggest challenges facing the next
president because clearly we're facing
at this point two different kinds of
adversaries there are the independent
hacking groups that do it mostly for
commercial reasons to try to steal
information that they then can use to
make money but increasingly we are
seeing cyber attacks coming from states
organs of states the most recent and
troubling of these has been russia
there's no doubt now that russia has
used cyber attacks against
all kinds of organizations in our
country and i am deeply concerned about
this i know
donald's very praiseworthy of
vladimir putin but putin is playing a
really tough long game here and one of
the things he's done is to let loose
cyber attackers to hack into government
files to hack into personal files hack
into the democratic national committee
and we recently have learned that you
know that this is one of their preferred
methods of trying to wreak havoc and
collect information we need to make it
very clear-whether it's russia china
iran or anybody else-the united states
has much greater capacity and we are not
going to sit idly by and permit state
actors to go after our information our
private-sector information or our public-sector
information and we're going to
have to make it clear that we don't want
to use the kinds of tools that we have
we don't want to engage in a different
kind of warfare but we will defend the
citizens of this country and the
russians need to understand that i think
they've been treating it as almost a
probing how far would we go how much
would we do and that's why i was so-i
was so shocked when donald publicly
invited putin to hack into americans
that is just unacceptable it's one
of the reasons why 50 national security
officials who served in republican
information-in administrations your two minutes have expired have
said that donald is unfit to be the
commander in-chief it's comments like
that that really worry people who
understand the threats that we face mr
trump you have two minutes and the same
question who's behind it and how do we fight it i do want to say that i was
just endorsed-and more are coming next week-it
will be over 200 admirals many of them
here-admirals and generals endorsed
me to lead this country that just
happened and many more are coming and
i'm very proud of it
in addition i was just endorsed by ice
they've never endorsed anybody before on
immigration i was just endorsed by ice i
was just recently endorsed-16,500 border
patrol agents so when secretary clinton
talks about this i mean i'll take the
admirals and i'll take the generals any
day over the political hacks that i see
that have led our country so brilliantly
over the last 10 years with their
knowledge ok because look at the mess
that we're in look at the mess that we're
in as far as the cyber i agree to parts
of what secretary clinton said we should
be better than anybody else and perhaps
we're not i don't think anybody knows it
was russia that broke into the dnc she's
saying russia russia russia but i don't-maybe
it was i mean it could be russia
but it could also be china it could also
be lots of other people it also could be
somebody sitting on their bed that
weighs 400 pounds ok you don't know
who broke in to dnc but what did we
learn with dnc we learned that bernie
sanders was taken advantage of by your
people by debbie wasserman schultz look
what happened to her but bernie sanders
was taken advantage of that's what we learned
now whether that was russia whether that
was china whether it was another country
we don't know because the truth is under
president obama we've lost control of
things that we used to have control over
we came in with the internet we came up
with the internet and i think secretary
clinton and myself would agree very much
when you look at what isis is doing with
the internet they're beating us at our
own game isis so we have to get very
very tough on cyber and cyber warfare it
is-it is a huge problem i have a son
he's 10 years old he has computers he
is so good with these computers it's
unbelievable the security aspect of
cyber is very very tough and maybe it's
hardly doable but i will say we are
not doing the job we should be doing but
that's true throughout our whole
governmental society we have so many
things that we have to do better lester
and certainly cyber is one of them
secretary clinton well i think there are
a number of issues that we should be
addressing i have put forth a plan to
defeat isis it does involve going after
them online i think we need to do much
more with our tech companies to prevent
isis and their operatives from being
able to use the internet to radicalize
even direct people in our country and
europe and elsewhere but we also have to
intensify our air strikes against isis
and eventually support our arab and
kurdish partners to be able to actually
take out isis in raqqa end their claim
of being a caliphate we're making
progress our military is assisting in
iraq and we're hoping that within the
year we'll be able to push isis out of
iraq and then you know really squeeze
them in syria but we have to be
cognizant of the fact that they've had
foreign fighters coming to volunteer for
them foreign money foreign weapons so we
have to make this the top priority and i
would also do everything possible to
take out their leadership i was involved
in a number of efforts to take out al
qaida leadership when i was secretary of
state including of course taking out bin
laden and i think we need to go after
baghdadi as well make that one of our
organizing principles because we've got
to defeat isis and we've got to do
everything we can to disrupt their
propaganda efforts online you mention
isis and we think of isis certainly as
over there but there are american
citizens who have been inspired to
commit acts of terror on american soil
the latest incident of course the
bombings we just saw in new york and new
jersey the knife attack at a mall in
minnesota in the last year deadly
attacks in san bernardino and orlando
i'll ask this to both of you tell us
specifically how you would prevent
homegrown attacks by american citizens
mr trump well first i have to say one thing
very important secretary clinton is
talking about taking out isis we will
take out isis well president obama and
secretary clinton created a vacuum the
way they got out of iraq because they
got out-what they
shouldn't have been in but once they got
in the way they got out was a disaster
and isis was formed so she talks about
taking them out she's been doing it a
long time she's been trying to take them
out for a long time but they wouldn't
have even been formed if they left some
troops behind like 10,000 or maybe
something more than that and then you
wouldn't have had them or as i've been
saying for a long time and i think
you'll agree because i said it to you once
had we taken the oil-and we should have
taken the oil-isis would not have been
able to form either because the oil was
their primary source of income and now
they have the oil all over the place
including the oil-a lot of the oil in
libya which was another one of her
disasters secretary clinton well i hope the fact-checkers
are turning up
the volume and really working hard
donald supported the invasion of iraq
wrong that is absolutely proved over
and over again wrong wrong he actually advocated for
the actions we took in libya and urged
that gadhafi be taken out after actually
doing some business with him one time
but the larger point-and he says this
constantly-is george w bush made the
agreement about when american troops
would leave iraq not barack obama and
the only way that american troops could
have stayed in iraq is to get an
agreement from the then-iraqi government
that would have protected our troops and
the iraqi government would not give that
but let's talk about the question you
asked lester the question you asked is
what do we do here in the united states
that's the most important part of this
how do we prevent attacks how do we
protect our people and i think we've got
to have an intelligence surge where we
are looking for every scrap of
information i was so proud of law
enforcement in new york in minnesota in
new jersey you know they responded so
quickly so professionally to the attacks
that occurred by rahami and they
brought him down and we may find out
more information because he is still
alive which
may prove to be an intelligence benefit so
we've got to do everything we can to
vacuum up intelligence from europe from
the middle east that means we've got to
work more closely with our allies and
that's something that donald has been
very dismissive of we're working with
nato the longest military alliance in
the history of the world to really turn
our attention to terrorism we're working
with our friends in the middle east many
of which as you know are muslim majority
nations donald has consistently insulted
muslims abroad muslims at home when we
need to be cooperating with muslim
nations and with the american muslim
community they're on the front lines
they can provide information to us that
we might not get anywhere else they need
to have close working cooperation with
law enforcement in these communities not
be alienated and pushed away as some of
donald's rhetoric unfortunately has led
to mr trump well i have to
respond please respond the secretary
said very strongly about working with-we've
been working with them for many
years and we have the greatest mess
anyone's ever seen you look at the
middle east it's a total mess under your
direction to a large extent but you look
at the middle east you started the iran
deal that's another beauty where you
have a country that was ready to fall i
mean they were doing so badly they were
choking on the sanctions and now they're
going to be actually probably a major power
at some point pretty soon the way
they're going but when you look at nato
i was asked on a major show what do you
think of nato and you have to
understand i'm a businessperson i did
really well but i have common sense and
i said well i'll tell you i haven't
given lots of thought to nato but two
things number one the 28 countries of
nato many of them aren't paying their
fair share number two-and that bothers
me because we should be asking-we're
defending them and they should at least
be paying us what they're supposed to be
paying by treaty and contract and number
two i said and very strongly nato could
be obsolete because-and i was very
strong on this and it was actually
covered very accurately in the new york
times which is unusual for the new york
times to
be honest-but i said they do not focus
on terror and i was very strong and i said
it numerous times and about four months
ago i read on the front page of the wall
street journal that nato is opening up a
major terror division and i think that's
great and i think we should get-because we pay
approximately 73 percent of the cost of
nato it's a lot of money to protect
other people but i'm all for nato but i
said they have to focus on terror also
and they're going to do that and that
was-believe me-i'm sure i'm not going to
get credit for it-but that was largely
because of what i was saying and my
criticism of nato i think we have to get
nato to go into the middle east with us
in addition to surrounding nations and
we have to knock the hell out of isis
and we have to do it fast
when isis formed in this vacuum created
by barack obama and secretary clinton
and believe me you were the ones that
took out the troops not only that you
named the day they couldn't believe it
they sat back probably and said i can't
believe it they said lester we've covered no wait a minute
we've covered this ground when they formed when they
formed this is something that never
should have happened
it should have never happened now you're
talking about taking out isis but you
were there and you were secretary of
state when it was a little infant now
it's in over 30 countries and you're
going to stop them i don't think so mr
trump a lot of these are
judgment questions you had supported the
war in iraq before the invasion what
makes your i did not support the war in
iraq in 2002 that is a mainstream media
nonsense put out by her because she-frankly
i think the best person in her
campaign is mainstream media my question
is since you supported it just-would you like to hear why is your-why is your judgment wait a minute i was
against the war in iraq just so you put
it out the record shows otherwise but why-why was the record does
not show that why was-is your judgment any the record shows
that i'm right when i did an interview
with howard stern very lightly first
time anyone's asked me that i said very
lightly i don't know maybe who knows
essentially i then did an interview with
neil cavuto we talked about the economy
is more important i then spoke to sean
hannity which everybody
refuses to call sean hannity i had
numerous conversations with sean hannity
at fox and sean hannity said-and he
called me the other day-and i spoke to
him about it-he said you were totally
against the war because he was for the
war why is your judgment better than and when he-excuse me and
that was before the war started sean
hannity said very strongly to me and
other people-he's willing to say it but
nobody wants to call him i was against
the war he said you used to have fights
with me because sean was in favor of the war
and i understand that side also not very
much because we should have never been
there but nobody called sean hannity
and then they did an article in a major
magazine shortly after the war started i
think in 04 but they did an article
which had me totally against the war in
iraq and one of your compatriots said
you know whether it was before or right
after trump was definitely-because if you
read this article there's no doubt but
if somebody-and i'll ask the press-if
somebody would call up sean hannity this
was before the war started he and i used
to have arguments about the war i said
it's a terrible and a stupid thing it's
going to destabilize the middle east and
that's exactly what it's done it's been a disaster my reference
was to what you had said in 2002 and my
question was no no you didn't hear what i said why is your judgment-why is your judgment
any different than mrs clinton's judgment well i
have much better judgment than she does
there's no question about that i also
have a much better temperament than she
has you know i have a much better-she spent-let
me tell you-she spent
hundreds of millions of dollars on an
advertising-you know they get madison
avenue into a room they put names-oh
temperament let's go after-i think my
strongest asset maybe by far is my
temperament i have a winning temperament
i know how to win she does not have
a secretary clinton wait the afl-cio the other
day behind the blue screen i don't know
who you were talking to secretary
clinton but you were totally out of
control i said there's a person with a
temperament that's got a problem
secretary clinton whew ok
let's talk about two important
issues that were briefly mentioned by
donald first nato you know nato as a
military alliance has something called
article 5 and basically it says this
an attack on one is an attack on all and
you know the only time it's ever been
invoked after 9/11 when the 28 nations
of nato said that they would go to
afghanistan with us to fight terrorism
something that they still are doing by
our side with respect to iran when i
became secretary of state iran was weeks
away from having enough nuclear material
to form a bomb
they had mastered the nuclear fuel cycle
under the bush administration they had
built covert facilities they had stocked
them with centrifuges that were whirling
away and we had sanctioned them i voted
for every sanction against iran when i
was in the senate but it wasn't enough
so i spent a year-and-a-half putting
together a coalition that included
russia and china to impose the toughest
sanctions on iran and we did drive them
to the negotiating table and my
successor john kerry and president obama
got a deal that put a lid on iran's
nuclear program without firing a single
shot that's diplomacy that's coalition-building
that's working with other
nations the other day i saw donald
saying that there were some iranian
sailors on a ship in the waters off of
iran and they were taunting american
sailors who were on a nearby ship he
said you know if they taunted our
sailors i'd blow them out of the water
and start another war that's not good judgment that would
not start a war that is not the
right temperament to be
commander-in-chief to be taunted and the
worst part no they were taunting us of what we heard donald say has been about
nuclear weapons he has said repeatedly
that he didn't care if other nations got
nuclear weapons japan south korea even
saudi arabia it has been the policy of
the united states democrats and
republicans to do everything we could to
reduce the proliferation of nuclear
weapons he even said well you know if
there were nuclear war in east
asia well you know that's fine wrong
have a good time folks it's lies and in fact his
cavalier attitude about nuclear weapons
is so deeply troubling that is the
number-one threat we face in the world
and it becomes particularly threatening
if terrorists ever get their hands on
any nuclear material so a man who can be
provoked by a tweet should not have his
fingers anywhere near the nuclear codes
as far as i think anyone with any sense
about this should be concerned that line's getting a
little bit old i must say i would like to it's a
good one though it well describes the
problem it's not an accurate one at all
it's not an accurate one so i just want
to give a lot of things-and just to
respond i agree with her on one thing
the single greatest problem the world
has is nuclear armament nuclear weapons
not global warming like you think and your-your
president thinks nuclear is
the single greatest threat just to go
down the list we defend japan we defend
germany we defend south korea we defend
saudi arabia we defend countries they do
not pay us but they should be paying us
because we are providing tremendous
service and we're losing a fortune
that's why we're losing-we're losing-we
lose on everything i say
who makes these-we lose on everything
all i said that it's very possible that
if they don't pay a fair share because
this isn't 40 years ago where we could
do what we're doing we can't defend
japan a behemoth selling us cars by the
million we need to move on well wait but it's very
important all i said was they may have
to defend themselves or they have to
help us out
we're a country that owes 20 trillion
they have to help us out our last as far as
the nuclear is concerned i agree it
is the single greatest
threat that this country has which leads to my
next question as we enter our last
segment here on the still on the subject
of securing america on nuclear weapons
president obama reportedly considered
changing the nation's longstanding
policy on first use do you support the
current policy mr trump you have two
minutes on that well i have to say that
you know for what secretary clinton was
saying about nuclear with russia
she's very cavalier in the way she talks
about various countries but russia has
been expanding their-they have a much
newer capability than we do we have not
been updating from the new standpoint i
looked the other night i was seeing
b-52s they're old enough that your
father your grandfather could be flying
them we are not-we are not keeping up
with other countries i would like
everybody to end it just get rid of it
but i would certainly not do first
strike i think that once the nuclear
alternative happens it's over at the
same time we have to be prepared i can't
take anything off the table because you
look at some of these countries you look
at north korea we're doing nothing there
china should solve that problem for us
china should go into north korea china
is totally powerful as it relates to
north korea and by the way another one
powerful is the worst deal i think i've
ever seen negotiated that you started is
the iran deal iran is one of their
biggest trading partners iran has power
over north korea and when they made that
horrible deal with iran they should have
included the fact that they do something
with respect to north korea and they
should have done something with respect
to yemen and all these other places and
when asked to secretary kerry why didn't
you do that why didn't you add other
things into the deal one of the great
giveaways of all time of all time
including 400 million in cash
nobody's ever seen that before that
turned out to be wrong it was actually
1.7 billion in cash obviously i
guess for the hostages it certainly
looks that way so you say to yourself why
didn't they make the right deal this is
one of the worst deals ever made by any
country in history the deal with iran will lead
to nuclear problems all they have to do
is sit back 10 years and they don't have
to do much your two minutes is expired and they're going to end up
getting nuclear i met with bibi netanyahu the
other day believe me he's not a happy
camper all right mrs clinton secretary clinton
you have two minutes well let me-let me start
by saying words matter words matter when
you run for president and they really
matter when you are president and i want
to reassure our allies in japan and
south korea and elsewhere that we have
mutual defense treaties and we will
honor them it is essential that
america's word be good and so i know
that this campaign has caused some
questioning and some worries on the part
of many leaders across the globe i've
talked with a number of them but i want
to-on behalf of myself and i think on
behalf of a majority of the american
people say that you know our word is
good it's also important that we look at
the entire global situation there's no
doubt that we have other problems with
iran but personally i'd rather deal with
the other problems having put that lid
on their nuclear program than still to
be facing that and donald never tells
you what he would do
would he have started a war would he
have bombed iran if he's going to
criticize a deal that has been very
successful in giving us access to
iranian facilities that we never had
before then he should tell us what his
alternative would be but it's like his
plan to defeat isis he says it's a
secret plan but the only secret is that
he has no plan so we need to be more
precise in how we talk about these
issues people around the word follow
our presidential campaigns so closely
trying to get hints about what we will
do can they rely on us are we going to
lead the world with strength and in
accordance with our values that's what i
intend to do
i intend to be
a leader of our country that people can
count on both here at home and around
the world to make decisions that will
further peace and prosperity but also
stand up to bullies whether they're abroad
or at home
we cannot let those who would try to
destabilize the world to interfere with
american interests and security your two minutes is to be given
any opportunities at all is expired lester
one thing i'd like to say very
quickly twenty seconds i will go very quickly but i will tell you
that hillary will tell you to go to her
website and read all about how to defeat
isis which she could have defeated by
never having it you know get going in
the first place right now it's getting
tougher and tougher to defeat them
because they're in more and more places
more and more states more and more
nations mr trump and it's a big problem and
as far as japan is concerned i want to
help all of our allies but we are losing
billions and billions of dollars we
cannot be the policemen of the world we
cannot protect countries all over the
world we have just where they're not
paying us what we need we have just a
few final questions and she doesn't say that because
she's got no business ability we need
heart we need a lot of things but you
have to have some basic ability and
sadly she doesn't have that all of the
things that she's talking about could
have been taken care of during the last
10 years let's say while she had great
power but they weren't taken care of and
if she ever wins this race they won't be
taken care of mr trump this year secretary clinton
became the first woman nominated for
president by a major party earlier this
month you said she doesn't have quote a
presidential look she's standing here
right now what did you mean by that
she doesn't have the look she doesn't have
the stamina i said she doesn't have the
stamina and i don't believe she does
have the stamina to be president of this
country you need tremendous stamina the
quote was i just don't think she has the presidential look you have-wait a minute wait a minute lester you asked me a question did you ask me a
question you have to be able to
negotiate our trade deals you have to be
able to negotiate that's right with
japan with saudi arabia i mean can you
imagine we're defending saudi arabia and
with all of the money they have we're defending
them and they're not paying all you
have to do is speak to them wait you have
so many different things you have to be
able to do and
i don't believe that hillary has the
stamina let's let her respond well as
soon as he travels to 112 countries and
negotiates a peace deal a cease-fire a
release of dissidents an opening of new
opportunities in nations around the
world or even spends 11 hours testifying
in front of a congressional committee he
can talk to me about stamina the world-let me tell you let me tell you
hillary has experience but it's bad
experience we have made so many bad
deals during the last-so she's got
experience that i agree but it's bad bad
experience whether it's the iran deal
that you're so in love with where we
gave them 150 billion
back whether it's the iran deal
whether it's anything you can-name-you
almost can't name a good deal i agree
she's got experience but it's bad
experience and this country can't afford
to have another four years of that kind
of experience we are at-we are at the final question well one thing one thing lester very quickly because we're at the final question now you know he tried to
switch from looks to stamina but
this is a man who has called women pigs
slobs and dogs and someone who has said
pregnancy is an inconvenience to
employers who has said i never said that women don't
deserve equal pay unless they do as good
a job as men i didn't say that and one of the worst things
he said was about a woman in a beauty
contest he loves beauty contests supporting them
and hanging around them and he called
this woman miss piggy then he called her
miss housekeeping because she was latina
donald she has a name where did you find
this where did you find this her name is alicia machado where did you find this and she has
become a u.s citizen and you can bet oh
really she's going to vote this november ok
good let me just tell you
mr trump could we just take 10 seconds and then we ask the final question you know hillary is hitting me with
tremendous commercials some of it's said in
entertainment some of it's said-somebody
who's been very vicious to me rosie
o'donnell i said very tough things to
her and i think everybody would agree
that she deserves it and nobody feels
sorry for her but you want to know the
truth i was going to say something please
very quickly extremely rough to hillary to her
family and i said to myself i can't do
it i just can't do it it's inappropriate
it's not nice but she spent hundreds of
millions of dollars on negative ads on
me many of which are absolutely untrue
they're untrue and they're
misrepresentations and i will tell you
this lester it's not nice and i don't
deserve that but it's certainly
not a nice thing that she's done it's
hundreds of millions of ads and the only
gratifying thing is i saw the polls come
in today and with all of that money we have to move on to the final question
200 million is spent and i'm
either winning or tied and i've spent
practically nothing one of you will not
win this election so my final question
to you tonight are you willing to accept
the outcome as the will of the voters
secretary clinton well i support our
democracy and sometimes you win
sometimes you lose
but i certainly will support the outcome
of this election and i know donald's
trying very hard to plant doubts about
it but i hope the people out there
understand this election's really up to
you it's not about us so much as it is
about you and your families and the kind
of country and future you want
so i sure hope you will get out and vote
as though your future depended on it
because i think it does mr trump very
quickly same question will you
accept the outcome as the will of the
voters i want to make america great again we
are a nation that is seriously troubled
we're losing our jobs people are pouring
into our country the other day we were
deporting 800 people and perhaps they
passed the wrong button they pressed the
wrong button or perhaps worse than that
it was corruption but these people that
we were going to deport for good reason
ended up
becoming citizens ended up becoming citizens and
it was 800 and now it turns out it might
be 1,800 and they don't even know will you accept the outcome of the election look here's the story i
want to make america great again i'm
going to be able to do it
i don't believe hillary will the answer
is if she wins i will absolutely support
her all right well that is going to do
it for us that concludes our debate for
this evening a spirited one we covered a
lot of ground not everything as i
suspected we would the next
presidential debates are scheduled for
october 9th at washington university in
st louis and october 19th at the
university of nevada las vegas the
conversation will continue a reminder
the vice presidential debate is
scheduled for october 4th at longwood
university in farmville virginia my
thanks to hillary clinton and to donald
trump and to hofstra university for
hosting us tonight good night everyone